PEP 684: Add a PEP for making the GIL per-interpreter (#2387)
python/peps: pep-0684.rst

PEP: 684
Title: A Per-Interpreter GIL
Author: Eric Snow <ericsnowcurrently@gmail.com>

> Discussions-To: python-dev@python.org

Reviewer: If you've already posted a thread on this, as your `Post-History` would imply, please link the thread directly here instead. Otherwise, make sure to remember to come back and update this as soon as you do. Suggestion as an example:

```suggestion
Discussions-To: https://example.com/thread_1
```

Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 08-Mar-2022
Python-Version: 3.11

> Post-History: 08-Mar-2022

Reviewer: The relevant PR, #2358 , hasn't _quite_ been formally merged yet, but it should be by the time this is. Assuming it is, you'll want to update this to be a link to the thread you posted.

```suggestion
Post-History: `08-Mar-2022 <https://example.com/thread_1>`__
```

Author: What is `DIscussions-To` for then?

Reviewer: Clearly and unambiguously linking to the _active_ canonical PEP discussion thread (which almost always is in practice the latest one posted, but doesn't necessarily _have_ to be). We _could_ (and might in the future) parse the `Post-History` field, extract the latest and inject the link into the `Discussions-To` field in the rendered PEP, but there are a few things we have to take care of first, namely merging the outstanding PRs related to documenting, conforming and validating the new format, finishing and deploying the PEP 676 implementation, and then discussing and implementing that functionality, so for now there's a modest bit of duplication here.

Resolution:

.. XXX Split out an informational PEP with all the relevant info,
   based on the "Consolidating Runtime Global State" section?

Abstract
========

Since Python 1.5 (1997), CPython users can run multiple interpreters

> in the same process.  However, they have always shared a significant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the same process.  However, these interpreters have always shared a significant
```

Clarify ambiguity with "they" naively referring to "users".

Author: FYI, the indirect pronoun already refers to the last noun used (that matches).  The last plural noun is "interpreters".

That said, I don't mind making it more clear. 🙂

Author: ```suggestion
in the same process.  However, interpreters in the same process
have always shared a significant
```

amount of global state.  This is a source of bugs, with a growing
impact as more and more people use the feature.  Furthermore,
sufficient isolation would facilitate true multi-core parallelism,
where interpreters no longer share the GIL.  The changes outlined in
this proposal will result in that level of interpreter isolation.

High-Level Summary
==================

> As a high level, this proposal changes CPython in the following ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At a high level, this proposal changes CPython in the following ways:
```

Grammar/typo

* stops sharing the GIL between interpreters, given sufficient isolation
* adds several new interpreter config options for isolation settings

> * adds public C-API for fine-grained control when creating interpreters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* adds a public C-API for fine-grained control when creating interpreters
```

Grammar

Author: ```suggestion
* adds some public C-API for fine-grained control when creating interpreters
```

* keeps incompatible extensions from causing problems

The GIL
-------

> The GIL protects concurrent access of most of CPython's runtime state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The GIL protects concurrent access to most of CPython's runtime state.
```

Grammar/clarity

> So all that GIL-protected global state must move to each interpreter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accordingly, all that GIL-protected global state must move to each interpreter
```

Make a complete sentance

Author: Here "so" is synonymous with "thus", "hence", etc.

before the GIL can.

(In a handful of cases, other mechanisms can be used to ensure
thread-safe sharing instead, such as locks or "immortal" objects.)

CPython Runtime State
---------------------

Properly isolating interpreters requires that most of CPython's

> runtime state be stored in the ``PyInterpreterState`` struct.  Currently
> only a portion of it is.  The rest is found either in global variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
runtime state be stored in the ``PyInterpreterState`` struct.  Currently,
only a portion of it is; the rest is found either in global variables
```

Avoid excessive choppiness and add a missing comma

or in ``_PyRuntimeState``.  Most of that will have to be moved.

> This directly coincides with an ongoing effort of many years to greatly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This directly coincides with an ongoing, many-years-long effort to greatly
```

Avoid confusing/awkward phrasing

Author: ```suggestion
This directly coincides with an ongoing effort (of many years) to greatly
```

reduce internal use of C global variables and consolidate the runtime

> state into ``_PyRuntimeState`` and ``PyInterpreterState``.
> (See `Consolidating Runtime Global State`_ below.)  That project has

Reviewer: ```suggestion
state into ``_PyRuntimeState`` and ``PyInterpreterState``
(see `Consolidating Runtime Global State`_ below).  That project has
```

Avoid a sentence fragment.

Author: I prefer what I wrote.

`significant merit on its own <Benefits to Consolidation_>`_
and has faced little controversy.  So, while a per-interpreter GIL
relies on the completion of that effort, that project should not be

> considered a part of this proposal, only a dependency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
considered a part of this proposal—only a dependency.
```

Make the intended structure more clear

Author: ```suggestion
considered a part of this proposal--only a dependency.
```

Other Isolation Considerations
------------------------------

CPython's interpreters must be strictly isolated from each other, with

> few exceptions.  To a large extent they already are.  Each interpreter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
few exceptions.  To a large extent, they already are.  Each interpreter
```

Slight pause improves readability/flow and reduces choppiness somewhat

Author: In this case I prefer it without the comma.

has its own copy of all modules, classes, functions, and variables.
The CPython C-API docs `explain further <caveats_>`_.

.. _caveats: https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/init.html#bugs-and-caveats

However, aside from what has already been mentioned (e.g. the GIL),
there are a couple of ways in which interpreters still share some state.

First of all, some process-global resources (e.g. memory,
file descriptors, environment variables) are shared.  There are no
plans to change this.

Second, some isolation is faulty due to bugs or implementations that
did not take multiple interpreters into account.  This includes
CPython's runtime and the stdlib, as well as extension modules that

> rely on global variables.  In these cases bugs should be opened.
> (Some are already.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rely on global variables.  In these cases, bugs should be opened
(as some are already).
```

Add missing comma, Improve readability and reduce excessive choppiness

Author: ```suggestion
rely on global variables.  Bugs should be opened in these cases,
as some already have been.
```

Depending on Immortal Objects
-----------------------------

:pep:`683` introduces immortal objects as a CPython-internal feature.

> With immortal objects we can share any otherwise immutable global

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With immortal objects, we can share any otherwise immutable global
```

Missing comma

objects between all interpreters.  Consequently, this PEP does not
need to address how to deal with the various objects
`exposed in the public C-API <capi objects_>`_.
It also simplifies the question of what to do about the builtin

> static types.  (See `Global Objects`_ below.)

Author: I prefer what I wrote.

Both matters have alternate solutions but everything is simpler with

> immortal objects.  If PEP 683 is not accepted then this one will be

Author: I prefer to not put a comma before "then" in if-then sentences.

certain concurrency models.  :pep:`554` discusses this in more detail.

Indirect Benefits
-----------------

Most of the effort needed for a per-interpreter GIL has benefits that
make those tasks worth doing anyway:

* makes multiple-interpreter behavior more reliable
* has led to fixes for long-standing runtime bugs that otherwise
  hadn't been prioritized
* has been exposing (and inspiring fixes for) previously unknown runtime bugs
* has driven cleaner runtime initialization (:pep:`432`, :pep:`587`)
* has driven cleaner and more complete runtime finalization
* led to structural layering of the C-API (e.g. ``Include/internal``)
* also see `Benefits to Consolidation`_ below

Furthermore, much of that work benefits other CPython-related projects:

* performance improvements ("faster-cpython")
* pre-fork application deployment (e.g. Instagram)
* extension module isolation (see :pep:`630`, etc.)
* embedding CPython

Existing Use of Multiple Interpreters
-------------------------------------

The C-API for multiple interpreters has been used for many years.
However, until relatively recently the feature wasn't widely known,

> nor extensively used (with the exception of mod_wsgi).

Author: I'd rather not link to mod_wsgi here.  If anything, I'd link to the list that links to mod_wsgi.  Regardless, I don't think it's worth bothering.

In the last few years the feature has been gaining traction.  Here are
some of the public projects using multiple interpreters currently:

* `mod_wsgi <https://github.com/GrahamDumpleton/mod_wsgi>`_
* `OpenStack Ceph <https://github.com/ceph/ceph/pull/14971>`_
* `JEP <https://github.com/ninia/jep>`_
* `Kodi <https://github.com/xbmc/xbmc>`_

Note that, with :pep:`554`, multiple interpreter usage would likely
grow significantly (via Python code rather than the C-API).

PEP 554
-------

:pep:`554` is strictly about providing a minimal stdlib module
to give users access to multiple interpreters from Python code.

> It specifically avoids the question of a per-interpreter GIL but
> users of that module would benefit, making PEP 554 more appealing.

Author: ```suggestion
, and specifically avoids proposing any changes related to the GIL.
However, users of that module would benefit from a per-interpreter GIL,
which makes PEP 554 more appealing.
```

multiple interpreters.  For extensions that already break in
multiple interpreters, this will be an improvement.

Now we get to the break in compatibility mentioned above.  Some
extensions are safe under multiple interpreters, even though they
haven't indicated that.  Unfortunately, there is no reliable way for
the import system to infer that such an extension is safe.  So
importing them will still fail.  This case is addressed in
`Extension Module Compatibility`_ below.

Extension Module Maintainers
----------------------------

One related consideration is that a per-interpreter GIL will likely
drive increased use of multiple interpreters, particularly if :pep:`554`
is accepted.  Some maintainers of large extension modules have expressed
concern about the increased burden they anticipate due to increased
use of multiple interpreters.

Specifically, enabling support for multiple interpreters will require
substantial work for some extension modules.  To add that support,
the maintainer(s) of such a module (often volunteers) would have to
set aside their normal priorities and interests to focus on
compatibility (see :pep:`630`).

> Certainly extension maintainers are free to not add support for use

Author: ```suggestion
Of course, extension maintainers are free to not add support for use
```

in multiple interpreters.  However, users will increasingly demand

> support for multiple interpreters, especially if the feature grows

Author: ```suggestion
such support, especially if the feature grows
```

in popularity.

Either way the situation can be stressful for maintainers of such
extensions, particularly when they are doing the work in their spare
time.  The concerns they have expressed are understandable.  We address
the partial solution in `Restricting Extension Modules`_ below.

Alternate Python Implementations
--------------------------------

Other Python implementation are not required to provide support for
multiple interpreters in the same process (though some do already).

Security Implications
---------------------

There is no known impact to security with this proposal.

Maintainability
---------------

On the one hand, this proposal has already motivated a number of
improvements that make CPython *more* maintainable.  That is expected
to continue.  On the other hand, the underlying work has already
exposed various pre-existing defects in the runtime that have had
to be fixed.  That is also expected to continue as multiple interpreters

> receive more use.  Otherwise there shouldn't be a significant impact
> on maintainability.  The effect should be net positive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
receive more use.  Otherwise, there shouldn't be a significant impact
on maintainability, so the net effect should be positive.
```

Add missing comma, avoid somewhat confusing/contradictory phrasing exacerbated by choppy flow.

Performance
-----------

The work to consolidate globals has already provided a number of
improvements to CPython's performance, both speeding it up and using

> less memory.  This should continue.  Performance benefits to a
> per-interpreter GIL have not been explored.  At the least it is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
less memory, and this should continue. Performance benefits to a
per-interpreter GIL have not been explored.  At the very least, it is
```

Avoid extreme choppiness to the point of semantic befuddlement, add missing commas and fix phrasing

not expected to make CPython slower (as long as interpreters are
sufficiently isolated).

Specification
=============

> As summarized `above <High-Level Summary_>`_, this proposal involves the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As `summarized above <High-Level Summary_>`__, this proposal involves the
```

Its usually a better idea to make the link target text a little longer and more descriptive than not

   (including objects) into ``_PyRuntimeState``
2. move nearly all of the state down into ``PyInterpreterState``
3. finally, move the GIL down into ``PyInterpreterState``
4. everything else

   * add to the public C-API
   * implement restrictions in ``ExtensionFileLoader``
   * work with popular extension maintainers to help with multi-interpreter support

Per-Interpreter State
---------------------

The following runtime state will be moved to ``PyInterpreterState``:

* all global objects that are not safely shareable (fully immutable)
* the GIL
* mutable, currently protected by the GIL
* mutable, currently protected by some other per-interpreter lock
* mutable, may be used independently in different interpreters
* all other mutable (or effectively mutable) state not otherwise excluded below

The following state will not be moved:

* global objects that are safely shareable, if any
* immutable, often ``const``
* treated as immutable
* related to CPython's ``main()`` execution
* related to the REPL
* set during runtime init, then treated as immutable
* mutable, protected by some global lock
* mutable, atomic

Also, a number of parts of the global state were already moved to the

> interpreter, such as GC, warnings, and atexit hooks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interpreter, such as GC, warnings, and atexit hooks, will also not be moved.
```

Clarify and avoid incomplete sentence

Author: I'll need to move this, since the context is confusing.

> Note that currently the allocators (see Objects/obmalloc.c) are shared

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that currently, the allocators (see ``Objects/obmalloc.c``) are shared
```

Missing comma and reST syntax

Author: ```suggestion
Note that, currently, the allocators (see ``Objects/obmalloc.c``) are shared
```
or
```suggestion
Note that currently the allocators (see ``Objects/obmalloc.c``) are shared
```

to each interpreter (or a global lock will be needed).  This is the
highest risk part of the work to isolate interpreters and may require
more than just moving fields down from ``_PyRuntimeState``.  Some of
the complexity is reduced if CPython switches to a thread-safe
allocator like mimalloc.

.. _proposed capi:

C-API
-----

The following private API will be made public:

* ``_PyInterpreterConfig``
* ``_Py_NewInterpreter()`` (as ``Py_NewInterpreterEx()``)

The following fields will be added to ``PyInterpreterConfig``:

* ``own_gil`` - (bool) create a new interpreter lock
  (instead of sharing with the main interpreter)
* ``strict_extensions`` - fail import in this interpreter for
  incompatible extensions (see `Restricting Extension Modules`_)

Restricting Extension Modules
-----------------------------

Extension modules have many of the same problems as the runtime when
state is stored in global variables.  :pep:`630` covers all the details
of what extensions must do to support isolation, and thus safely run in
multiple interpreters at once.  This includes dealing with their globals.

Extension modules that do not implement isolation will only run in

> the main interpreter.  In all other interpreters the import will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the main interpreter.  In all other interpreters, the import will
```

Missing comma

raise ``ImportError``.  This will be done through
``importlib._bootstrap_external.ExtensionFileLoader``.

We will work with popular extensions to help them support use in

> multiple interpreters.  This may involve adding new public APIs, which
> we will address on a case-by-case basis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
multiple interpreters.  This may involve adding new public APIs
in CPython, which we will address on a case-by-case basis.
```

Clarify that you mean public APIs in _CPython_ rather than the extension module (right? I was confused on this bit.)

Author: ```suggestion
multiple interpreters.  This may involve adding to CPython's public C-API,
which we will address on a case-by-case basis.
```

Extension Module Compatibility
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

As noted in `Extension Modules`_, many extensions work fine in multiple
interpreters without needing any changes.  The import system will still
fail if such a module doesn't explicitly indicate support.  At first,

> not as many extension modules will do so, so this is a potential source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not many extension modules will, so this is a potential source
```

Avoid grammatically complex and semantically confusing syntax (I had to re-read this a few times to figure out what was intended)

of frustration.

We will address this by adding a context manager to temporarily disable
the check on multiple interpreter support:
``importlib.util.allow_all_extensions()``.

Documentation
-------------

> The "Sub-interpreter support" section of Doc/c-api/init.rst will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "Sub-interpreter support" section of ``Doc/c-api/init.rst`` will be
```

updated with the added API.

How to Teach This
=================

This is an advanced feature for users of the C-API.  There is no
expectation that this will be taught.

> That said, if it were taught then it would boil down to the following::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That said, if it were taught then it would boil down to the following:
```

This presumably should be a quote block rather than a code block.

>     In addition to Py_NewInterpreter(), you can use Py_NewInterpreterEx()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In addition to ``Py_NewInterpreter()``, you can use ``Py_NewInterpreterEx()``
```

Author: Formatting this quoted text doesn't fit.

    to create an interpreter.  The config you pass it indicates how you
    want that interpreter to behave.

> Extra Context
> =============
> 
> Sharing Global Objects
> ----------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sharing Global Objects
======================
```

Since this is the only subhead under this heading, why not name it thus?

Author: Mostly, there is a good chance that the section will be dropped, so "Extra Context" makes it more clear that it is relatively extraneous than "Sharing Global Objects" does.  Regardless, I'll sort this out.

We are sharing some global objects between interpreters.
This is an implementation detail and relates more to
`globals consolidation <Consolidating Runtime Global State>`_

> than to this proposal, but it is a significant enough detail

Reviewer: ```suggestion
than to this proposal, but it is significant enough
```

Avoid repetition

Author: The repetition was on purpose, for emphasis.

to explain here.

> The alternative is to share no objects between interpreters ever.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The alternative is to share no objects between interpreters, ever.
```

Missing comma

> To accomplish that we'd have to sort out the fate of all our static

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To accomplish that, we'd have to sort out the fate of all our static
```

Missing comma

* makes multiple-interpreter behavior more reliable
* leads to fixes for long-standing runtime bugs that otherwise
  haven't been prioritized
* exposes (and inspires fixes for) previously unknown runtime bugs
* facilitates cleaner runtime initialization and finalization
* makes it easier to discover/identify CPython's runtime state
* makes it easier to statically allocate runtime state in a consistent way
* better memory locality for runtime state
* structural layering of the C-API (e.g. ``Include/internal``)

Furthermore, much of that work benefits other CPython-related projects:

* performance improvements ("faster-cpython")
* pre-fork application deployment (e.g. Instagram)
* extension module isolation (see :pep:`630`, etc.)
* embedding CPython

Scale of Work
-------------

The number of global variables to be moved is large enough to matter,
but most are Python objects that can be dealt with in large groups
(like ``Py_IDENTIFIER``).  In nearly all cases, moving these globals
to the interpreter is highly mechanical.  That doesn't require
cleverness but instead requires someone to put in the time.

State To Be Moved
-----------------

> The remaining global variables can be categorized as follows::
> 
>     global objects
>         static types (incl. exception types)
>         non-static types (incl. heap types, structseq types)
>         singletons (static)
>         singletons (initialized once)
>         cached objects
>     non-objects
>         will not (or unlikely to) change after init
>         only used in the main thread
>         initialized lazily
>         pre-allocated buffers
>         state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The remaining global variables can be categorized as follows:

* Global objects
    * Static types (incl. exception types)
    * Non-static types (incl. heap types, structseq types)
    * Singletons (static)
    * Singletons (initialized once)
    * Cached objects
* Non-objects
    * Will not (or unlikely to) change after init
    * Only used in the main thread
    * Initialized lazily
    * Pre-allocated buffers
    * State
```

Formatting: Use a native unordered (bulleted) list, avoid incorrect syntax highlighting, sentence case, etc.

Those globals are spread between the core runtime, the builtin modules,
and the stdlib extension modules.

> For a breakdown of the remaining globals, run::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a breakdown of the remaining globals, run:

.. code-block:: bash
```

To get the correct syntax highlighting (the default is `python`)

    ./python Tools/c-analyzer/table-file.py Tools/c-analyzer/cpython/globals-to-fix.tsv

Already Completed Work
----------------------

As mentioned, this work has been going on for many years.  Here are some

> of the things that have already been done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the things that have already been done:
```

The colon is appropriate here

* cleanup of runtime initialization (see :pep:`432` / :pep:`587`)
* extension module isolation machinery (see :pep:`384` / :pep:`3121` / :pep:`489`)
* isolation for many builtin modules
* isolation for many stdlib extension modules
* addition of ``_PyRuntimeState``
* no more ``_Py_IDENTIFIER()``
* statically allocated:

  * empty string
  * string literals
  * identifiers
  * latin-1 strings
  * length-1 bytes
  * empty tuple

Tooling
-------

As already indicated, there are several tools to help identify the
globals and reason about them.

> * Tools/c-analyzer/cpython/globals-to-fix.tsv - the list of remaining globals
> * Tools/c-analyzer/c-analyzer.py
> 
>   + analyze - identify all the globals
>   + check - fail if there are any unsupported globals that aren't ignored
> 
> * Tools/c-analyzer/table-file.py - summarize the known globals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``Tools/c-analyzer/cpython/globals-to-fix.tsv`` - the list of remaining globals
* ``Tools/c-analyzer/c-analyzer.py``
  * ``analyze`` - identify all the globals
  * ``check`` - fail if there are any unsupported globals that aren't ignored
* ``Tools/c-analyzer/table-file.py`` - summarize the known globals
```

Use code/verbatim formatting and consistent list spacing

Author: Ah, I misunderstood PEP 12.

> As well, the check for unsupported globals is incorporated into CI so that
> no new globals are accidentally added.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, the check for unsupported globals is incorporated into CI
so that no new globals are accidentally added.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Also, the check for unsupported globals is incorporated into CI so that
no new globals are accidentally added.
```

Global Objects
--------------

Global objects that are safe to be shared (without a GIL) between
interpreters can stay on ``_PyRuntimeState``.  Not only must the object
be effectively immutable (e.g. singletons, strings), but not even the
refcount can change for it to be safe.  Immortality (:pep:`683`)
provides that.  (The alternative is that no objects are shared, which
adds significant complexity to the solution, particularly for the
objects `exposed in the public C-API <capi objects_>`_.)

Builtin static types are a special case of global objects that will be
shared.  They are effectively immutable except for one part:
``__subclasses__`` (AKA ``tp_subclasses``).  We expect that nothing
else on a builtin type will change, even the content
of ``__dict__`` (AKA ``tp_dict``).

``__subclasses__`` for the builtin types will be dealt with by making
it a getter that does a lookup on the current ``PyInterpreterState``
for that type.

Reference Implementation
========================

<TBD>

Open Issues
===========

> * what are the risks/hurdles involved with moving the allocators?
> * is "allow_all_extensions" the best name for the context manager?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* What are the risks/hurdles involved with moving the allocators?
* Is ``allow_all_extensions`` the best name for the context manager?
```

Formatting cleanup

Deferred Functionality
======================

* ``PyInterpreterConfig`` option to always run the interpreter in a new thread
* ``PyInterpreterConfig`` option to assign a "main" thread to the interpreter
  and only run in that thread

Rejected Ideas
==============

<TBD>

References
==========

Related:

* :pep:`384`
* :pep:`432`
* :pep:`489`
* :pep:`554`
* :pep:`573`
* :pep:`587`
* :pep:`630`
* :pep:`683`
* :pep:`3121`

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.

> 
> 
> ..
>     Local Variables:
>     mode: indented-text
>     indent-tabs-mode: nil
>     sentence-end-double-space: t
>     fill-column: 70
>     coding: utf-8
>     End:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

No need for this anymore per the current template/guidance (unless you're an Emacs users who doesn't use `rst-mode`).
